But I have one want which I have never yet been able to satisfy, and the
absence of the object of which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no
friend, Margaret: when I am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there
will be none to participate my joy; if I am assailed by disappointment, no
one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. I shall commit my thoughts
to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the communication of
feeling. I desire the company of a man who could sympathise with me, whose
ardent in execution
and too impatient of difficulties. But it is a still greater evil to me
that I am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life I ran wild
on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas’ books of voyages.
At that age I became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own
country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its
most important benefits from such a conviction that I perceived the
necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native
country. Now I am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many
schoolboys of fifteen. It is true that I have thought more and that my
daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters
call it) _keeping;_ and I greatly need a friend who would have sense
enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to
endeavour to regulate my mind.

confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor,
and that her father would never consent to the union. My generous friend
reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover,
instantly abandoned his pursuit. He had already bought a farm with his
money, on which he had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he
bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his
prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young
woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old
man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who,
when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned
until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her
inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. He is
so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind
of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct
the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which
otherwise he would command.
She had said that one night, sitting in the dusk of their office. There
was something inexpressibly funny in their sitting together in this
office, with its globe of the world, its lung charts, its weighing
machine, its surgical chair, and its bowl of ineffectual goldfish.
Something inexpressibly funny and inexpressibly fecund, a fecundity
suppressed by coldness, and a terrible determination—more terrible in
that her husband Otto felt nothing of it.

He was very fond of her, and had he been a little more sensitive he
would have been very glad to be proud of her. She never became
confidential with him, and he never tried to overstep this, partly
because he was unaware of it, and partly because he felt little need of
a closer companionship.

She was a fine woman, he knew that; he never thought to question
anything she did, because it was little, nor what she said, because it
was less; there was an economy about her existence that simply forbade
questioning. He felt in some dim way, that to criticize at all would be
to stop everything.

Their life was typical of the East Side doctor’s life. Patients all day
for him, and the children for her, with an occasional call from someone
who had a sick bird. In the evening they would sit around a table with
just sufficient food, with just sufficient silver and linen, and one
luxury: Katrina’s glass of white wine.

Or sometimes they would go out to dine, to some kosher place, where
everyone was too friendly and too ugly and too warm, and here he would
talk of the day’s diseases while she listened to the music and tried not
to hear what her daughter was crying for.

He had always been a ‘liberal,’ from the first turn of the cradle. In
the freedom of the people, in the betterment of conditions, he took the
interest a doctor takes in seeing a wound heal.

As for Katrina Silverstaff, she never said anything about it, he never
knew what she really thought, if she thought at all; it did not seem
necessary for her to do or say anything, she was fine as she was, where
she was. On the other hand it never occurred to him that she would not
hear, with calmness at least, his long dissertations on capital.
Katrina had opened the door, the maid was down with the measles, and the
doctor was busy with a patient, a Jew much revered for his poetry.

She never bought anything of peddlers, and she seldom said more than
“No, thank you.” In this case she neither said “Thank you,” nor closed
the door—instead she held it open, standing a little aside for him to
pass, and, utterly astonished, he did pass, waiting behind her in the
hall for orders.

“We will go into the study,” she said, “my husband is busy.”

“I was selling Bibles last year,” he remarked, “but they do not go down
in this section.”

“Yes,” she answered, “I see,” and she moved before him into the heavy
damp parlour which was never unshuttered and which was never used. She
reached up and turned on one solitary electric light.

Castillion Rodkin might have been of any nationality in the world; this
was partly from having travelled in all countries, and also from a fluid
temperament—little was fixed or firm in him, a necessary quality in a
salesman.

Castillion Rodkin was below medium height, thin and bearded with a pale,
almost white growth of hair. He was peculiarly colourless, his eyes were
only a shade darker than his temples, and very restless.

She said simply, “We must talk about religion.”

And with an awkwardness unusual to him he asked “Why?”

“Because,” she said in a strained voice, making a hurt gesture, “it is
so far from me.”

He did not know what to say, of course, and lifting one thin leg in its
white trousers he placed it carefully over the other.
“‘Heaven forbid!  Even if you were really criminal, for that can only
drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue.  I also am
She was sitting opposite him, her head turned a little to one side, not
looking at anything. “You see,” she said presently, “I want religion to
become out of the reach of the few.”

“Become’s a queer word,” he said.

“It is the only word,” she answered, and there was a slight irritation
in her voice, “because it is so irrevocably for the many.”

“Yes,” he said mechanically, and reached up to his beard, leaving his
hand there under a few strands of hair.

“You see,” she went on simply, “I can come to the point. For me,
everything is a lie—I am not telling this to you because I need your
help, I shall never need help,” she said, turning her eyes on his,
“understand that from the beginning——”

“Beginning,” he said in a loud voice suddenly.

“From the beginning,” she repeated calmly, “right from the very start,
not help but hindrance, I need enough hindrance, a total obstacle,
otherwise I cannot accomplish it.”

“Accomplish what, madame?” he asked and took his hand from under his
beard.

“That is my affair, mine alone, that you must not question, it has
nothing to do with you, you are only a means to an end.”

He said, “What can I do for you?”

She smiled, a sudden smile, and under her cheek something flickered.
“You can do nothing,” she said and stood up. “I must always do it
all—yes, I shall be your mistress—wait,” she said raising her hand, and
there was anger and pride in her. “Do not intrude now by word or sign,
but tomorrow you will come to me—that is enough—that is all you can do,”
and in this word “all” he felt a limit on himself that he had never
known before, and he was frightened and disquieted and unhappy.

He came the next day, cringing a little, fawning, uneasy, and she would
not see him—she sent word “I do not need you yet,” and he called again
the next day and learned that she was out of town, then one Sunday she
was in to him.

She said quietly to him, as if she were preparing him for a great
disappointment, “I have deliberately, very deliberately, removed remorse
from the forbidden fruit,” and he was abject suddenly and trembling.

“There will be no thorns for you,” she went on in a cold abrupt voice.
“You will miss that, but do not presume to show it in my presence.”

“Also my floor is not the floor on which you may crawl,” she continued,
“and I do not permit you to suffer while I am in the room—and,” she
added, unfastening her brooch slowly and precisely, “I dislike all
spiritual odours.”

“Are we all strange?” he whispered.

“It takes more than will to attain to madness.”

“Yes.”

Then she was silent for a while, thinking.

“I want to suffer,” he murmured, and trembled again.

“We are all gross at times, but this is not your time.”

“I could follow you into the wilderness.”

“I would not miss you.”

And it was said in a terrible forbidding voice.

“I suffer as a birthright—I want it to be something more my own than
that.”

“What are you going to do?” he said.

“Does one ever destroy oneself who is utterly disinterested?”

“I don’t know.”

Presently she said, “I love my husband—I want you to know that, it
doesn’t matter, but I want you to know that, and that I am content with
him, and quite happy——”

“Yes,” Castillion Rodkin answered and began trembling again, holding on
to the sides of the bed.

“But there is something in me,” she continued, “that is very mournful
because it is being.”

He could not answer and tears came to his eyes.

“There is another thing,” she said with abrupt roughness, “that I must
insist on, that is that you will not insult me by your presence while
you are in this room.”
