Houston is the dwelling place of a certain young lady who is
exceptionally blessed with the gifts of the goddess of fortune. She is
very fair to look upon, bright, witty, and possesses that gracious
charm so difficult to describe, but so potent to please, that is
commonly called personal magnetism. Although cast in such a lonely
world, and endowed with so many graces of mind and matter, she is no
idle butterfly of fashion, and the adulation she receives from a
numerous circle of admirers has not turned her head.

She has a close friend, a young lady of plain exterior, but a sensible
and practical mind, whom she habitually consults as a wise counselor
and advisor concerning the intricate problems of life.
eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I
bitterly feel the want of a friend. I have no one near me, gentle yet
courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious mind, whose
tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. How would such a
friend repair the faults of your poor brother! I am too 
One day she said to Marian--the wise friend: "How I wish there was some
way to find out who among these flattering suitors of mine is sincere
and genuine in the compliments that are paid me. Men are such
deceivers, and they all give me such unstinted praise, and make such
pretty speeches to me, that I do not know who among them, if any, are
true and sincere in their regard."
At the opening of this story, Katrina’s daughter was a little girl of
ten, who was devoted to dancing, and who lay awake at nights worrying
about the shape of her legs, which had already begun to swell with a
dancer’s muscles.
Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find no friend on the
wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen. Yet
some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these
rugged bosoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage
and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase
more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an
Englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices,
unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of
humanity. I first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel;
finding that he was unemployed in this city, I easily engaged him to assist
in my enterprise.
The master is a person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the
ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. This
circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made
me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years
spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the
groundwork of my character that I cannot overcome an intense distaste to
the usual brutality exercised on board ship: I have never believed it to be
necessary, and when I heard of a mariner equally noted for his kindliness
of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, I felt
myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services. I heard
of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the
happiness of her life. This, briefly, is his story. Some years ago he loved
a young Russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed a considerable
sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw
his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in
tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her,
The boy was nine, thin, and wore spectacles.

And of course what happened was quite unaccountable.

A man, calling himself Castillion Rodkin, passed through one Summer,
selling Carlyle’s “French Revolution.” Among the houses where he had
left a copy was the house of Otto Silverstaff.

"I will tell you a way," said Marian. "The next evening when there are
a number of them calling upon you, recite a dramatic poem, and then
tell me how each one expresses his opinion of your effort."

The young lady was much impressed with the idea, and on the following
Friday evening when some half-dozen young men were in the parlor
paying her attentions, she volunteered to recite. She has not the
least dramatic talent, but she stood up and went through with a long
poem, with many gestures and much rolling of eyes and pressing of her
hands to her heart. She did it very badly, and without the least
regard for the rules of elocution or expression.

Later on, her friend Marian asked her how her effort was received.

"Oh," she said, "they all crowded around me, and appeared to be filled
with the utmost delight. Tom, and Henry, and Jim, and Charlie were in
raptures. They said that Mary Anderson could not have equaled it. They
said they had never heard anything spoken with such dramatic effect
and feeling."

"Everyone praised you?" asked Marian.

"All but one. Mr. Judson sat back in his chair and never applauded at
all. He told me after I had finished that he was afraid I had very
little dramatic talent at all."

"Now," said Marian. "You know who is sincere and genuine?"

"Yes," said the beautiful girl, with eyes shining with enthusiasm.
"The test was a complete success. I detest that odious Judson, and I'm
going to begin studying for the stage right away."



His Dilemma

An old man with long white chin whiskers and a derby hat two sizes
small, dropped into a Main Street drug store yesterday and beckoned a
clerk over into a corner. He was about sixty-five years old, but he
wore a bright red necktie, and was trying to smoke a very bad and
strong cigar in as offhand a style as possible.

"Young man," he said, "you lemme ask you a few questions, and I'll
send you a big watermelon up from the farm next summer. I came to
Houston to see this here carnival, and do some tradin'. Right now,
before I go any further, have you got any hair dye?"

"Plenty of it."

"Any of this real black shiny dye that looks blue in the sunshine?"

"Yes."

"All right then, now I'll proceed. Do you know anything about this
here Monroe docterin'?"

"Well, yes, something."

"And widders; do you feel able to prognosticate a few lines about
widders?"

"I can't tell what you are driving at," said the clerk. "What is it
you want to know?"

"I'm gettin' to the pint. Now there's hair dye, Monroe docterin', and
widders. Got them all down in your mind?"

"Yes, but--"

"Jest hold on, now, and I'll explain. There's the unhappiest fat and
sassy widder moved into the adjinin' farm to me, you ever see, and if
I knows the female heart she has cast eyes of longin' upon yours
truly. Now if I dyes these here white whiskers I ketches her. By
blackin' said whiskers and insertin' say four fingers of rye where it
properly belongs, I kicks up my heels and I waltzes up and salutes the
widder like a calf of forty."

"Well," said the clerk, "our hair dye is--"

"Wait a minute, young feller. Now on the other hand I hears rumors of
wars this mornin', and I hears alarmin' talk about this here Monroe
docterin'. Ef I uses hair dye and trains down to thirty-eight or forty
years of age, I ketches the widder, but I turns into a peart and
chipper youth what is liable to be made to fight in this here great
war. Ef I gives up the hair dye, the recrutin' sargent salutes these
white hairs and passes by, but I am takin' big chances on the widder.
She has been to meetin' twicet with a man what has been divorced, and
ties his own cree-vat, and this here Monroe docterin' is all what
keeps me from pulling out seventy-five cents and makin' a strong play
with said dye. What would you do, ef you was me, young feller?"

"I don't think there will be any war soon," said the clerk.

"Jerusalem; I'm glad to hear it! Gimme the biggest bottle of
blue-black hair dye fur seventy-five cents that you got. I'm goin' to
purpose to that widder before it gets dry, and risk the chances of
Monroe takin' water again on this war business."



Something for Baby

This is nothing but a slight jar in the happy holiday music; a minor
note struck by the finger of Fate, slipping upon the keys, as anthems
of rejoicing and Christmas carols make the Yuletide merry.

The Post man stood yesterday in one of the largest fancy and drygoods
stores on Main Street, watching the throng of well-dressed buyers,
mostly ladies, who were turning over the stock of Christmas notions
and holiday goods.

Presently a little, slim, white-faced girl crept timidly through the
crowd to the counter. She was dressed in thin calico, and her shoes
were patched and clumsy.

She looked about her with a manner half mournful, half scared.

A clerk saw her and came forward.

"Well, what is it?" he asked rather shortly.

"Please, sir," she answered in a weak voice, "Mamma gave me this dime
to get something for baby."

"Something for baby, for a dime? Want to buy baby a Christmas present,
eh? Well now, don't you think you had better run around to a toyshop?
We don't keep such things here. You want a tin horse, or a ball, or a
jumping jack, now don't you?"
“But, Kahn, you must think, you must give me an answer. All this
indecision is all very well for us, for all of us who are too old to
change, for all of us who can reach God through some plaything we have
used as a symbol, but there’s my son, what is he to think, to feel, he
has no jester’s stick to shake, nor stool to stand on. Am I responsible
for him? Why,” she cried frantically, “must I be responsible for him? I
tell you I won’t be, I can’t. I won’t take it upon myself. But I have, I
have. Is there something that can make me immune to my own blood? Tell
me—I must wipe the slate—the fingers are driving me mad—can’t he stand
alone now? Oh, Kahn, Kahn!” she cried, kissing his hands. “See, I kiss
your hands, I am doing so much. You must be the prophet—you can’t do
less for the sign I give you—I must know, I must receive an answer, I
_will_ receive it.”

He shook her off suddenly, a look of fear came into his eyes.

“Are you trying to frighten me?” he whispered. She went into the hall,
into the dark, and did not know why, or understand anything. Her mind
was on fire, and it was consuming things that were strange and merciful
and precious.

Finally she went into her son’s room and stood before his bed. He lay
with one feverish cheek against a dirty hand, his knees drawn up; his
mouth had a peculiar look of surprise about it.

She bent down, called to him, not knowing what she was doing. “Wrong,
wrong,” she whispered, and she shook him by the shoulders. “Listen,
Oscar, get up. Listen to me!”

He awoke and cried out as one of her tears, forgotten, cold, struck
against his cheek. An ague shook his limbs.
She brought her face close to his.