He sat up, with the dim thunder of the horses far off, but quickening
his heart.

He went over the scene he had with Freda Buckler, back there in the
house, the long quivering spears of pot-grass standing by the window as
she walked up and down, pulling at them, talking to him.

Small, with cunning fiery eyes and a pink and pointed chin. A daughter
of a mother who had known too many admirers in her youth; a woman with
an ample lap on which she held a Persian kitten or a trifle of fruit.
Bounty, avarice, desire, intelligence—both of them had always what they
wanted.

He blew down his moustache again thinking of Freda in her floating
yellow veil that he had called ridiculous. She had not been angry, he
was nothing but a stable boy then. It was the way with those small
intriguing women whose nostrils were made delicate through the pain of
many generations that they might quiver whenever they caught a whiff of
the stables.

“As near as they can get to the earth,” he had said, and was Freda
angry? She stroked his arm always softly, looking away, an inner
bitterness drawing down her mouth.

She said, walking up and down quickly, looking ridiculously small:

“I am always gentle, John”—frowning, trailing her veil, thrusting out
her chin.

He answered: “I liked it better where I was.”

“Horses,” she said showing sharp teeth, “are nothing for a man with your
bile—pot-boy—curry comber, smelling of saddle soap—lovely!” She
shrivelled up her nose, touching his arm: “Yes, but better things. I
will show you—you shall be a gentleman—fine clothes, you will like them,
they feel nice.” And laughing she turned on one high heel, sitting down.
“I like horses, they make people better; you are amusing, intelligent,
you will see——”

“A lackey!” he returned passionately, throwing up his arm. “What is
there in this for you, what are you trying to do to me? The
family—askance—perhaps—I don’t know.”

He sat down pondering. He was getting used to it, or thought he was, all
but his wordy remonstrances. He knew better when thinking of his horses,
realizing that when he should have married this small, unpleasant and
clever woman, he would know them no more.

It was a game between them, which was the shrewder, which would win out?
He? A boy of ill breeding, grown from the gutter, fancied by this woman
because he had called her ridiculous, or for some other reason that he
would never know. This kind of person never tells the truth, and this,
more than most things, troubled him. Was he a thing to be played with,
debased into something better than he was—than he knew?

Partly because he was proud of himself in the costume of a groom, partly
because he was timid, he desired to get away, to go back to the stables.
He walked up to the mirrors as if about to challenge them, peering in.
He knew he would look absurd, and then knew, with shame, that he looked
splendidly better than most of the gentlemen that Freda Buckler knew. He
hated himself. A man who had grown out of the city’s streets, a fine
common thing!

She saw him looking into the mirrors, one after the other, and drew her
mouth down. She got up, walking beside him in the end, between him and
them, taking his arm.

“You shall enter the army—you shall rise to General, or Lieutenant at
least—and there are horses there, and the sound of stirrups—with that
physique you will be happy—authority you know,” she said, shaking her
chin, smiling.

“Very well, but a common soldier——”

“As you like—afterward.”

“Afterward?”

“Very well, a common soldier.”

He sensed something strange in her voice, a sort of irony, and it took
the patience out of him:

“I have always been common, I could commit crimes, easily, gladly—I’d
like to!”

She looked away. “That’s natural,” she said faintly; “it’s an instinct
all strong men have——”

She knew what was troubling him, thwarted instincts, common beautiful
instincts that he was being robbed of. He wanted to do something final
to prove his lower order; caught himself making faces, idiot faces, and
she laughed.

“If only your ears stuck out, chin receded,” she said, “you might look
degenerate, common, but as it is——”

And he would creep away in hat, coat and with his cane, to peer at his
horses, never daring to go in near them. Sometimes, when he wanted to
weep, he would smear one glove with harness grease, but the other one he